\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\usepackage{authblk}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\geometry{letterpaper}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{amsmath}

\usepackage[style=nature, natbib=true, autocite=plain]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{../../superStat.bib}
\let\citep=\autocite

\pagestyle{empty}

\begin{document}


\noindent
15 January 2018

\vspace{2em}

\noindent
Dear editors,
\vspace{2em}

Please find attached our manuscript ``Non-equilibrium rate
heterogeneity explains fat-tailed fluctuations in Phanerozoic
biodiversity'' that we wish to submit for publication as a Research
Article in {\it Science Advances}.

Our study is the first to demonstrate that complex, previously
unexplained patterns in diversity fluctuations in the fossil record
are the result of a simple underlying process emerging from
non-equilibrium evolution on an adaptive landscape
\citep{eldredgeGould1972, newman1985adaptive}. Our theory provides a
novel explanation for deep time diversity dynamics invoking emergence
of lineage-level traits as the drivers of complexity via the same
mechanisms by which complexity emerges in large physical
\citep{beck2004} and social systems \citep{fuentes2009}. In the
context of fossil diversity we show how this complexity arises
naturally from the uniquely biological mechanisms of punctuated
adaptive radiation \citep{eldredgeGould1972, newman1985adaptive,
  hopkins2014} followed by long durations of niche conservatism
\citep{ackerly2003, roy2009range, hopkins2014} and thus identify these
mechanisms as sufficient and necessary to produce observed patterns in
the fossil record.

Using two seminal fossil datasets \citep{sepkoski1992, alroy08} we show
that fluctuations in marine biodiversity over the past 550 million
years results from the superposition of many independently fluctuating
subsystems whose fluctuations are Gaussian but give rise to
non-Gaussian patterns when combined.  These independent subsystems
correspond to lineages of closely related animal taxa, implying that
diversification within lineages is driven by random additive
interactions with the environment. Our findings thus challenge the
idea that changes in origination and extinction through deep geologic
time are the result of complicated evolutionary interactions among
organisms and between organisms and their environment \citep{bak1993,
  sole1997, newman1995}. However, we demonstrate that the evolutionary
process responsible for generating new lineages varies slowly through
time, possibly driven by non-random evolutionary innovations in the
physiology and demography of new lineages. This slow change between
lineages produces patterns of apparent complexity earlier ascribed to
unnecessarily complicated mechanisms. We further show, using
permutational null models, that our findings are not an artifact of how
fossils are taxonomically classified but rather capture true
underlying biological processes.

This work has not been published or accepted for publication, and is
not under consideration for publication elsewhere. Thank you very much
for your consideration.
\vspace{2em}

\noindent
Sincerely,
\vspace{2em}

\noindent
Andy Rominger

\noindent
Santa Fe Institute \\
1399 Hyde Park Road \\
Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501, USA \\
{\tt rominger@santafe.edu}

\printbibliography

\end{document}